[MUSIC]
>> Douglas: Episode Four,
The Metamorphosis of Ajax.
All the world's a page and all the men and
women merely pointers and clickers.
So, we're gonna start this
hour with Sir John Harrington.
The poet, courtier, the saucy godson
of Queen Elizabeth I of England,
is best remembered today as being
an inventor, and he invented one of
the fundamental inventions which makes
civilization at our scale possible.
Without his breakthrough,
we could not live in cities,
we could not be living in the density
necessary for technological achievement.
Great move forward, so this is a picture
from his book of his invention.
Can anybody identify it?
>> Speaker 2: A toilet.
>> Douglas: It is a flush toilet,
indeed, just civilization
couldn't work without them.
The Romans had flush technology, but
it was lost when the Empire collapsed,
but Harrington rediscovered it and
he built one of these devices for the
Queen and installed it in her residence.
And, as usually happens with
the really important inventions,
she refused to use it.
She complained that it
made too much noise.
She didn't want everybody in the castle
knowing when she was going about her
Royal Business, so it never got used.
But, he published a book about it, and
eventually other inventors saw it and
improved it.
Over the next couple hundred years, people
added other essential elements to it,
including the float valve, and the S-trap,
and siphon, and eventually we got-
>> Speaker 2: Where are the fish,
though, I want fish in my toilet?
>> Douglas: Of course you do.
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Douglas: So, he wrote a book, and the
title of the book was the Metamorphosis of
Ajax, which he published in 1596,
he called it The Ajax.
Well, now flash forward a little bit,
this is Jesse James Garrett.
He was a designer and
consultant in San Francisco.
He was on a project where he was
consulting with the engineers
of the company, and
they told him that they had found this way
of writing applications for the browser.
That, instead of doing a page
replacement each time the user clicks,
instead they will send a little bit of
data from the browser to the server.
The server will then send a small
response back, JavaScript in the browser
will then display it on the screen so
that they can get much better
user experiences using this technique,
and it worked.
The problem they were having was, they
couldn't convince their own management
that this was an acceptable thing to do.
So, they asked Garrett if he could
please explain to management
that this was a good idea.
So, Garrett goes off and
thinks about this problem,
and thinks about,
how do we present this idea?
And, he says the solution came to
him when he was in the shower.
I think it would have been a better
story if he had been on the throne
going about his royal business,
but he says he was in the shower
when it occurred to him that
he had to give it a name.
The name he gave it was
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML, or
Ajax, and he published a memo about this
on his company's website in 2005 and
it went viral almost overnight.
Everybody was talking about Ajax and
writing Ajax applications for the Web, and
it completely transformed the way we
think about browsers and JavaScript.
Sort of give some historical context for
this, the Web comes from word processing,
and word processing historically
comes in two very distinct schools.
There's the binary proprietary school,
which started with standalone equipment,
and then shared logic, and
eventually personal computers, which was
dominated at various times by companies
like IBM, Wang, and today Microsoft.
Then, there is the textual open school
in which everything is
represented as text all the time.
One of the first examples of this is
a program called Runoff that was developed
by MIT, and Runoff was intended for
producing text that could be
sent to various printers.
So, here we've got
an example of a Runoff file.
If a line starts with a period in
column one, that means it's a command.
So, in this case, we'll skip one line, and
then we'll tab four, we'll offset four,
and so on, and then the text between the
commands will be filled into the margins.
Now this was a very popular program, it
was ported from one mainframe to another.
It moved all over the place,
eventually got to Bell Labs,
where its name was shortened to ROFF, and
other versions of it were created,
including NROFF and TROFF.
TROFF was the way the Unix
community did typesetting,
made books for a long, long time.
Meanwhile, there's an attorney
at IBM named Charles Goldfarb.
He thinks he can do this stuff better, so
he begins a project called Generalized
Markup Language, and this is an example of
a Generalized Markup Language kind
of midpoint through its evolution.
The markups got a little
bit more complicated.
Now he's got a colon in column one,
followed by cryptic command,
and then if the command
is followed by a dot,
he can then have content on
the remainder of the line.
So, you're starting to mix up with the
commands and the content, and if you're
familiar with HTML, some of these commands
might be eerily familiar to you, and
that's not accidental.
In fact, HTML comes out of this heritage,
all of them except for EOL,
but you can probably guess
what that one means.
In fact,
as EML went through its evolution,
we got :e, and then ::,
and then finally <>,
and you know what happened after that.
So, if you ever looked at HTML entities,
we've got an ampersand,
the cryptic code, and a semi-colon.
You're wondering, in what bizarre universe
does it make sense to have a piece of
random punctuation, then a code, and
another random piece of punctuation?
Where did that come from?
This is where it came from,
he ran out of angle brackets.
There was no other way
to make it look nice, so
he went with the awful looking thing, so
where did the angle brackets come from?
The angle brackets were
inspired by Scribe.
Brian Reid was an amazingly bright guy
at Carnegie Mellon, who made Scribe,
which he called a document compiler.
This is the first time someone got
the separation between content and
formatting right.
Scribe was a brilliant piece of work,
Scribe could take documents and
put them to all sorts of output devices,
and it had an extremely
nice language that there was one reserved
character, which was the @ sign.
You'd say @,
then the name of an environment, and
then you'd have some quoted stuff, which
would be affected by that environment, and
he had six sets of quoting characters.
So, you could pick the one that's
guaranteed not to interfere with
the content that you're putting inside,
and
you could nest these things
as deeply as you wanted.
And, if the nesting got too deep,
he had special forms with begin and
end so that he didn't care about
things accidentally matching.
So, for long things like chapters and
sections,
you could enclose them like that,
and Goldfarb looked at this and
went, angle brackets, I didn't know you
could do angle brackets, that's great.
So, he stole some ideas from this,
unfortunately,
he didn't steal enough ideas.
So, one of the things that Scribe
could do was bibliographies.
Since it was developed in a university,
it has to be able to deal with academic
papers and such, so here we've got
a description of a tech report and a book.
I believe that this is the very first
time that a document format was
being used as a representation for
data because it looks like JSON, right?
It's key value pair separated by commas,
and it's really reasonable looking and
even things like the details,
like here equals 1972.
There are no quotes around the year
because requiring quotes around
numbers would be insane, right?
It's just really good, so
the GML community got the idea
of attributes from this, but
they didn't copy enough of the good stuff.
It's a shame that Tim Berners Lee hadn't
been more knowledgeable about text
processing systems because,
if he had based the Web on Scribe
instead of on SGML, our lives today would
be so much better, but he didn't do that.
So, we can see that Runoff
inspires GML and Scribe,
and Scribe helps inspire SGML, but not
enough, and eventually that leads to HTML.